# Arisen Technical White Paper v1
**Author:** ***Jared Rice Sr.***
**Date Created:** ***September 14th, 2019***
**Last Modified:** ***September 21st, 2019***

## Abstract
The Arisen software introduces a new architecture for building decentralized applications that are able to truly operate at global scale. Arisen is an early fork of the EOS.IO blockchain software with a different vision for a decentralized web, that utilizes both on-chain and off-chain protocols, in order to achieve true end-to-end decentralization for the decentralized applications built upon it. The dweb:// protocol and many of dWeb's off-chain components like dDrive (like IPFS & Swarm), dAppDB (a decentralized database management system) and dMemo (like Whisper) are ultimately teamed with Arisen's ability to provide accounts, authentication, user permissions, asynchronous communication, application logic, peer-to-peer (P2P) payments and a powerful on-chain decentralized domain name system that is all governed by a decentralized democracy. This results in a platform where developers can build dApps (decentralized applications) at global scale as of today, on a network that can truly span the world. Thanks to Arisen's ability to interoperate with other EOS.IO-based blockchains and its integration with dWeb's decentralized and globally elastic network, a fully decentralized web that can support billions of users is no longer a dream. It has Arisen.

**PLEASE NOTE:** CRYPTOGRAPHIC TOKENS REFERRED TO IN THIS WHITE PAPER REFER TO CRYPTOGRAPHIC TOKENS ON A LAUNCHED BLOCKCHAIN THAT ADOPTS THE ARISEN SOFTWARE. THEY DO NOT REFER TO THE BITSHARES, ERC-20 COMPATIBLE OR EOS-BASED TOKENS THAT HAVE BEEN DISTRIBUTED TO ORIGINAL "ARISEBANK" CONTRIBUTORS OR AIR DROPPED FREELY UPON THE BITSHARES, ETHEREUM AND EOS COMMUNITIES. 

Copyright 2019 arisen.network
Copyright (some parts) 2018 block.one

**LICENSE**: Without permission, anyone may use, reproduce or distribute any material in this white paper for non-commercial and educational use (i.e., other than for a fee or for commercial purposes) provided that the original source and the applicable copyright notice are cited. 

**DISCLAIMER:** This Arisen Technical White Paper v1 is for information purposes only. arisen.network does not guarantee the accuracy of or the conclusions reached in this white paper, and this white paper is provided "as is". arisen.network does not make and expressly disclaims all representations and warranties, express, implied, statutory or otherwise, whatsoever, including, but not limited to: (i) warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, suitability, usage, title or noninfringement; (ii) that the contents of this white paper are free from error; and (iii) that such contents will not infringe third-party rights. arisen.network and its affiliates shall have no liability for damages of any kind arising out of the use, reference to, or reliance on this white paper or any of the content contained herein, even if advised of the possibility of such damages. In no event will arisen.network or its affiliates be liable to any person or entity for any damages, losses, liabilities, costs or expenses of any kind, whether direct or indirect, consequential, compensatory, incidental, actual, exemplary, punitive or special for the use of, reference to, or reliance on this white paper or any of the content contained herein, including, without limitation, any loss of business, revenues, profits, data, use, goodwill or other intangible losses. 

## Background
Blockchain technology has advanced so much over the past decade that Dr. Gavin Wood aptly coined the term "Web3", when Ethereum was widely considered to be the third iteration of the worldwide web (www). While Ethereum gave life to what many thought were the world's first dApps (decentralized applications), Dr. Wood correctly states in his book "Mastering Ethereum", that "in the Ethereum ecosystem as it stands today, there are very few truly decentralized applications -- most still rely on centralized services and servers for some part of their operations. In the future we expect that it will be possible for every part of any dApp to be operated in a fully decentralized way" [1]. Dr. Wood is right, that a majority of the applications that operate on blockchains like Ethereum and EOS, have many central points of failure. These central points of failure include centralized servers that can experience DOS (denial of service) attacks via malicious actors or can even be seized by tyrannical companies and/or governments. The same can be said about the top-level domains (TLDs) that are utilized by users when accessing these applications through a web browser. These TLDs, like the "cryptokitties.com" TLD, can also be seized by tyrannical companies and/or governments or taken away for policy violations by domain registrars, as was seen in the public debacle surrounding the "gab.com" TLD.

Another issue seen with Ethereum, as well as EOS is their inability to store large datasets. This is due to smart contract not being well suited for storing or processing large amounts of data [2]. To deal with this issue, Ethereum and EOS dApp developers use off-chain storage services like IPFS or Ethereum's Swarm, also referred to as a decentralized content-addressable storage system (dCass), so developers can store HTML, JS, CSS and other files related to their websites and/or applications on a peer-to-peer network [3]. Although, these off-chain storage services are not designed to deal with what would typically be referred to as the data layer of an application, where there is some sort of DBMS (Database Management System), so that data can be stored or queried [4] and in some cases, as it applies to immutable applications, updated or deleted. As a result, dApps are forced to store all data and event-based transactions that are generated from a decentralized application, on-chain. This causes a blockchain that has a 5-10K transaction/ps capacity, to become overloaded, where its true purpose of handling application logic and payment functionality are slowed to an extent where the blockchain itself becomes useless or slow, dApps on the network are slowed to a point where they're no longer usable and payments take an average of thirty minutes or even an hour to verify over the network.

The Arisen blockchain solves these issues with off-chain interoperability with the dWeb protocol (dweb://) and many dWeb-based off-chain components. These components include a decentralized content-addressable storage system (dCass), a decentralized application messaging protocol (dAmp), a decentralized domain name system (dDNS) and a decentralized database management system (dDBMS). dWeb's dDrive, dNames, dDatabase, dAppDB and dMemo components, when combined with Arisen's blockchain platform, create a completely decentralized environment for websites and applications where the following solutions are combined into one cohesive toolset:

- Decentralized and autonomous on-chain application logic and payment functionality (Smart contract framework)
- Decentralized off-chain top-level domain names (dTLDs like .dcom, .dnet, .dweb, etc.)
- Decentralized off-chain web address resolution (dWeb keys / dWeb resolver)
- Decentralized on-chain user authentication / permissions (Arisen accounts)
- Decentralized off-chain application-to-application or application instance to application instance messaging (dMemo)
- Decentralized off-chain database management systems (dDatabase, dAppDB and dSiteDB)
- Decentralized off-chain content-addressable storage for web/application files (HTML, JS, CSS, media, etc)

The above issues related to Web 3.0 allow for companies and bad actors within government who want to slow the oncoming threat of decentralization, the ability to do so, by seizing or attacking semi-decentralized applications at various central points of failure whether it's by seizing domain names or servers that handle various services for these applications. Decentralized applications and websites bring life back to the web, eliminating the need to use technologies from big tech companies that want to force the general populous to abide by their belief systems and unconstitutional policies [6]. Fully decentralized social networks for example, would be unable to interfere with US-based elections like Google, Facebook, Twitter and other centralized social networks have on a consistent basis, allowing users of the decentralized social network to follow what they want see, minus the political control mechanisms typically exercised over users of a centralized social network and search engine application. It also keeps tyrannical companies and governments from having the power to affect the uptime of these decentralized applications, considering they're distributed amongst millions or billions of peers, without a single central point of failure.

## How We're Going To Decentralize The World
The following is required for web applications to be fully decentralized, globally scalable and capable of gaining widespread adoption:

### Support Infinite Users Through Global Scalability
In order to compete with major centralized companies, a network like Arisen must be able to operate at global scale, without a single central point of failure. dWeb's protocol and Arisen's network are globally elastic, Arisen's off-chain services like dDrive and dAppDB are capable of storing millions of datasets within each instance, teamed with Arisen's ability to handle thousands of payments on a per-second basis, the creation of millions of daily on-chain accounts, along with the processing of millions of smart contract-based requests from integrated applications, gives way to a platform that can effectively support the requests of billions of users. This is because 90% of the network's events take place off-chain, between peers on a network that has a nearly infinite capacity, due to the fact that Arisen's off-chain P2P networks and their capacity only grow larger, the more users who join onto it, ultimately giving it global scalability. dApps that are built for mainstream usage could gain widespread adoption and Arisen's on-chain and off-chain integrations are clearly capable of taking on this sort of growth.

### Decentralized Web Protocol
The dWeb protocol is designed for syncing folders that typically contain websites and web applications, along with the data that's usually associated with their usage, between peers on a decentralized peer-to-peer network, even if these folders are substantial in size or frequently updated. Synced and distributed folders over the protocol are referred to as dWeb repositories or dPacks for short. dWeb's protocol utilizes a cryptographically secure log of updates to validate whether or not a dPack is truly distributed. A byte range of a file's version can be efficiently broadcasted via a dWeb-based repository to other peers, utilizing the dWeb protocol, from any network connection. dWeb's protocol uses public key cryptography to encrypt all traffic over a dWeb-based network like Arisen. A dWeb peer-to-peer network is essentially a group of peers, also referred to as a "flock", that ultimately connect with each other to exchange dPacks, can be established as a public or private network and an infinite number of networks can co-exist at once, utilizing the same protocol. In short, dWeb is a website, web application and dataset (dPack)  synchronization protocol, that ultimately synchronizes these websites, web applications and datasets between a group of peers, on a peer-to-peer network. dWeb is essentially a torrent-like network, for websites, web applications and datasets.

### High Performance
Both on-chain and off-chain, Arisen's focus on high performance separates it from other blockchain projects. Thanks to the work by block.one on the EOS.IO software, the combination of Arisen and dWeb's protocol, brings about one of the most powerful networks in the industry.

Arisen and its off-chain services, are capable of:

**Arisen**
-- 120 blocks per-minute (one block per 0.5 second).
-- 4,500 transactions per-second (270,000 per minute).

**dWeb/Off-Chain Services**
-- Can support billions of peers over the same network.
-- Over 1,000,000 files and folders in one single dDrive instance.
-- The dWeb can hold as many dDrives and dPacks as the peers of the network require it to.
-- There are so many possible dWeb addresses, it would take millions of years to use them all.

### Low Latency
The Arisen blockchain software and related components are built to support the low latency of P2P communications and transactions, whether on-chain or off-chain. In order for decentralized applications to operate smoothly and deliver a user-experience that is worthy of widespread adoption, they should be built around P2P platforms that have low or very little latency.

### End-To-End Decentralization
Most decentralized applications (dApps) that refer to themselves as dApps are not completely decentralized from end-to-end. Arisen and dWeb's on/off chain protocols allow for decentralized applications that utilize them, to maintain end-to-end decentralization, to where these dApps or decentralized websites (dSites) cannot be seized, taken offline or exploited for a central point of failure. Nor can they be hacked or experience DOS-like attacks, due to their existence amongst distributed peers, rather than on centralized networks.

### Sequential & Parallel Performance
Some dApps, like a decentralized exchange such as BitShares, cannot be developed using parallel algorithms, instead, they require fast sequential performance, due to them being reliant upon sequential steps. Applications such as a decentralized exchange require sequential performance to handle high volumes, while other dApps require parallel performance where the application logic needed by the application(s) requires a workload across multiple CPUs and computers. Arisen provides both sequential and parallel performance. 

### P2P Messaging Protocol
A major component of any application is interprocess communication. In other words, applications should be able to send messages between each other, between different instances of an application or between the users of an application. Arisen's off-chain "dMemo" protocol, allows for dApp developers to utilize interprocess communication completely off-chain. 

### Content-Addressability 
The centralized web utilizes IP addresses (IPv4 and IPv6) for the addressing of network content across the worldwide web. Being that IPs are ultimately controlled by central governments and companies, using IP addresses to address content on the decentralized web wouldn't work, nor would it make sense. This is because content is hosted amongst peers, rather than on servers within centralized data centers. On the dWeb, all content (folders, files, databases, etc.) is addressable by Ed25519 public keys (32 bytes and 64 characters when Hex encoded) and can easily be accessed through many different methods over the dweb:// protocol (like a dWeb-enabled web browser).

### Off-Chain Database Management System
Arisen is integrated with several off-chain, decentralized, database management systems (dDBMS), built on the "dDatabase" protocol, like dAppDB and dSiteDB. These databases are shared between peers on the peer-to-peer web and addressable by Ed25519 public keys. Both dAppDB and dSiteDB have JavaScript-based APIs, allowing data entries to be added, retrieved, deleted and "listed". dAppDB and dSiteDB are essentially dDatabase-based append-only feeds at their very core. dDBMS frameworks allow dApp developers to place a majority of their data that's not utilized by on-chain code (smart contracts), completely off-chain. This takes a great load off the blockchain and decreases the size of a blockchain's global state, drastically.

### Decentralized Domain Name System (dDNS)
While content on the decentralized web can certainly be accessed via dWeb-based cryptographic keys, these 64 character keys are too hard to remember by users of public, highly trafficked websites and applications, just like IP addresses are on the centralized web. The Arisen network brings to life human-readable network identifiers also known as dTLDs (decentralized top-level domains) like .dcom, .dnet, .dorg, etc. dTLD extensions (like *.dcom) can be created and auctioned off to the highest bidder on the network, while individual domains can be purchased from decentralized registrars like dNames. Anyone can become a registrar on the network, creating great competition around the sale of dTLDs. 

### File Versioning 
When uploading a new version of a website or an application to the peer-to-peer web, the dWeb protocol is designed to use a sorted, depth-first recursion to list all the files in a file system tree. For each file the protocol finds, it fetches the filesystem metadata (filename, Stat Object, etc) and performs a check if a filename with the precise metadata exists. File versioning and repository versioning is very important, especially since peers may be looking for previous versions of a website or a dApp. Considering dApps & dSites on the Arisen network are held within "distributed repositories", it's important that dApps and dSites maintain version control, just as GIT-based repositories do on the centralized web. It's important to note that all dSites and dApps that are publicly shared, automatically become open-sourced and can be "forked" (cloned) by anyone who wants to do so. The transparent nature of websites and applications on the Arisen network, allows for consumers to insure that there aren't any back doors or implementations that violate user privacy.

### P2P Payments
Arisen's blockchain, like all other blockchains, acts as a P2P payments network. The economic features of Arisen's network allow for dApps to enable users to earn and spend within a decentralized ecosystem, without a single central entity who can possibly interrupt this P2P process. Many great payment-based solutions like dPay and aBank are already being built on top of the Arisen network as payment solutions for dApps.

### Server-less Network
Due to the way websites and web applications distributed via dPacks and/or dDrives are exchanged between peers over a network, instead of being shared via a centralized server, the need for web hosting has been eliminated. Developing websites or web applications with programming languages like PHP, which only works alongside centralized DBMS's, are only designed to develop applications based around a centralized architecture. This is why Arisen's off-chain services embrace the JavaScript programming language and all current DBMS's designed for the Arisen network are written in JavaScript. This allows developers to build "host-less" or "server-less" websites or web applications that scale to the global resources of the network, without a single central point of failure, as long as dTLDs are used for resolving websites and web applications, rather than centralized TLDs that can be seized or lost. 

### Decentralized Democracy 
Many people say cryptocurrencies enable people to fund terrorism, buy/sell drugs and give way to many other illicit activities. It will also be said that malicious actors will use Arisen's network to host illegal pornography and that the dWeb protocol will be used for various forms of illicit activities as well. These are all true statements. Cryptocurrencies ARE used to fund every possible illicit activity you can think of -- and so are government-issued currencies. Bad actors will also find Arisen and will immediately see it as a place to carry out various forms of illicit activities, just as they do on the centralized web every day. 

So the question is, how do we keep the decentralized web safe? We The People, are supposed to be in charge of the country we live in, based around the idea that we elect the officials who are truly in charge of making decisions on our behalf. The problem is, these elected officials are funded by special interest groups, who invest in these government official's ability to protect them, over the needs of the people who elected them. It takes voters years to change their vote since they're forced to wait until the next election to vote on a new candidate, on top of the fact that there is no way to prove if the election results were rigged or actually authentic in the first place. 

Arisen's network brings to life a truly decentralized democracy, that is legitimately controlled by the people of the network. This decentralized, sovereign democracy is based around a continuously running election of 21 "governance" candidates, who have the vested power by way of a majority vote, to freeze accounts, suspend domains, blacklist dWeb addresses, approve community-funded projects, reverse transactions and more. If governance members abuse their power in these situations, the members of the network can instantly switch their vote to a new candidate. Voting statistics on the network are completely authentic and cannot be manipulated due to the network's immutable state. This allows the people themselves to police the network and expand the ecosystem that works for them, the way they want to, without the long-term sufferings brought on by special interest groups, election interference or dishonest political candidates.

## BFT-DPOS Consensus Algorithm
Arisen, like the EOS.IO software is based around the Delegated Proof of Stake consensus algorithm. DPOS when compared to other consensus algorithms, is by far the best choice when it comes to meeting the performance requirements of a completely decentralized web.

A few facts about Arisen's DPOS algorithm:
- Those who hold RSN coins may elect "block producers" (governance members) through a "continuous approval voting system".
- Any member of the Arisen network can become a "block producer" candidate and can gain the vested power of a governance member, as long as they're in the top 21 candidates.
- Arisen's blockchain produces blocks every 0.5 second and only one block producer has the authority to produce a single block.
- If a particular block is not produced at a scheduled time, then the block for that time slot is skipped.
- When one or more blocks are skipped, there is a 0.5 or more second gap in the blockchain.
- Blocks on Arisen are produced in rounds of 126 (6 blocks each, multiplied by 21 block producers).
- 21 block producers are chosen through the votes casted by members of the network, at the start of each round. 
- The 21 selected block producers are then scheduled to verify blocks within that specific round, in an order agreed to by 15 of the 21 block producers.
- If a particular block producer "misses" a block or has not produced a block within the previous 24 hour period, they are removed from the governance and have to let the blockchain know that they're ready to be a candidate once again. The performance and reliability of the blockchain, depends on perfected network operations where only provably reliable block producers are in position to keep the network running properly.
- Block producers do not compete for blocks, rather they work collectively to validate a round of blocks. Typically, this keeps the blockchain from experiencing forks.
- If the blockchain does experience a fork, the algorithm automatically switches to the "longest chain". In other words, the longest chain relates to a chain with the most blocks, which means it has produced the most blocks, which also means it has a higher percentage of block producers who prefer that particular chain and have ultimately reached consensus around it. This works because a fork of Arisen with more block producers, will be longer than other forks and will grow in length much faster, due to it missing fewer blocks.
- Block producers caught producing blocks on two forks at the same time, will likely be voted out, which can be backed by cryptographic evidence as well.

### Byzantine Fault Tolerance (BFT)
BFT stands for Byzantine Fault Tolerance, which prevents a block producer from signing two blocks, with the same timestamp or the same block height. With BFT, once 15 block producers have signed a block, that block is deemed irreversible. Any block producer under this model, could in fact produce two blocks with the same timestamp or block height but will create cryptographic evidence of their "treason". By using BFT, an irreversible consensus is typically reached with 1 second.

### Transaction Confirmation 
DPOS blockchains like Arisen, typically have 100% block producer participation. Within a quarter of a second, transactions are considered confirmed 99.99% of the time. All EOS.IO-based blockchains like Arisen, have the added luxury of utilizing a aBFT (asynchronous Byzantine Fault Tolerance) for faster achievement of irreversibility. The aBFT algorithm provides 100% irreversibility within one second.

### Transaction as Proof of Stake (TaPOS)
Arisen's blockchain software requires every transaction to include part of the hash of a recent block header. This hash serves two purposes:
1. prevents a replay of a transaction on forks that do not include the referenced block
-and-
2. signals the network that a particular user and their stake are on a specific fork.

Over time all users end up directly confirming the blockchain which makes it difficult to forge counterfeit chains, as the counterfeit chains would not be able to migrate transactions from the legitimate chain.

## Accounts, Authentication and User Permissions
Accounts on the Arisen network are unique "human-readable names" that can be a maximum of 12 characters. Users choose their username, when creating an account. A new account can only be created by an existing account, since new accounts must be created through the staking of RSN in order to reserve its own RAM. This gives way to account creation services that charge a service fee, along with the required cost for the RAM that's needed to store the new account on-chain. When it comes to decentralized applications, application developers will pay a nominal cost of account creation to signup a new user, compared to what it costs to acquire users via advertising, free services, etc. The greatest feature in relation to this model is that once a user has created an account on an Arisen-base dApp, that same account can be used to login to other Arisen-based dApps. This means that only one dApp actually covers the account creation costs.

### Actions & Handlers
Each account on Arisen has its own private on-chain database associated with it, that can only be accessed by its own action handlers. Action handlers are scripts that send actions from one account to another. Arisen is able to define smart contracts through the combination of action handlers and automated action handlers. Each account can ultimately send structured "Actions" to other accounts and may define scripts to handle Actions when they are received. To support parallel execution, each Arisen account can also define any number of scopes within their database. The block producer will schedule transactions in such a way that there is no conflict over memory access to scope and therefore they can be executed in parallel.

### Role-Based Permission Management
Arisen uses "role-based permission management" to determine if account-based "Actions" are authorized. Arisen's software provides a "declarative permission management system" that gives accounts high-level control over who can do what and when. It is critical that authentication and permission management be standardized and separated from the business logic of an application, which enables the development of tools that manage permissions, generally, while also giving way to a significant boost in performance. An account can be controlled by multiple other accounts at once. Each one of these "controlling accounts" can have different weighted permissions, so that accounts have "multi-user control". Every account can be controlled by any weighted combination of other accounts and private keys. This ultimately forms a hierarchical authority structure that reflects how permissions are organized in reality and makes multi-user control easier than ever. Multi-user control is the single biggest contributor to security and when used properly, can greatly reduce the risk of theft due to hacking. Arisen's software allows accounts to decide which keys and accounts are allowed to send a particular Action type to another account. For example, it's possible to have one key for a user's social media account and another for access to a decentralized exchange dApp. You could also give one account the ability to act on behalf of another account, without assigning a single key.

### Vanity Permission Levels
Arisen network-based accounts are capable of creating "vanity permission levels" whose origins are that of higher-level vanity permissions. Each vanity permission or VPL for short, must define an "authority". Authorities on the Arisen network are essentially "multi-signature threshold checks" that are comprised of keys and/or VPLs of other Arisen accounts. For example, an Arisen account could have a VPL known as "Friend", that could be correlated to a specific "Action" on the account and could be mutually controlled by any of the account's friends. The Steem blockchain (home of the Steemit social network), has three hard-coded VPLs known as "owner", "active" and "posting", where the "posting" VPL can only perform social actions like voting or posting, whereas the "active" VPL can do anything but change the owner permission, which can ultimately do anything. Arisen allows users to create their own custom-named (vanity) permission levels, by allowing account holders to define their own hierarchy of permissions, as well as the customized grouping of actions.

### Permission Mapping 
With Arisen, each account is able to outline a specific "mapping" between a contract/action or contract of any other Arisen accounts and their own VPL. A user using a social media dApp powered on the Arisen network, could "map" his/her social media application to the "Friend" VPL. This would allow his/her friends to post on behalf of this user to his/her social media page. While the friend's post still appears as the account holder, they would still be identified by their keys that were used to sign the "Action", therefore you could easily identify users who are abusing their permissions.

### Default Permission Levels
Arisen has two default permission levels or DPLs. The DPLs are known as "owner" and "active". The "owner" permission can do anything on the network, while the "active" DPL can do anything except change the "owner" DPL (similar to Steem). VPLs derive from the "active" DPL.

### Evaluating Permission Levels
If a VPL is used, which doesn't exist, the "active" DPL is automatically used to authorize an "Action". Once a mapping is determined, then the signing authority is validated using the threshold multi-signature process as well as the authority associated with the VPL. If this is unsuccessful, it traverses up to the "active" DPL and ultimately the "owner" permission.

### Parallel Evaluation of Permission
The process behind the permissions evaluation process is immutable, where transactions based around the change of permissions, are not completed until the end of a block, so that all key/permission evaluations for every transaction can be completed in parallel, the quick validation of permissions is possible without costly contract executions (application logic) that would ultimately be rolled back and that transaction permissions can be evaluated as pending transactions are received, so they don't need to be re-evaluated when they're confirmed. Parallelizing the permissions process, while making it "read-only", dramatically increases performances on the network, because of the significant percentage of computation that is required to validate permission-based transactions. To add to this, when "replaying" the blockchain from a log of "Actions", the permissions do not need to be re-evaluated. This also significantly lowers the computational load brought by the replaying of a constantly growing blockchain.

### Actions With Mandatory Delay
Arisen's software enables application developers to allow for certain "Actions" to be delayed, before being applied in a block. This is so these delayed "Actions" can be ultimately cancelled. EOS.IO first introduced this security feature, so that "Actions" happening on an immutable blockchain could be reversed before they became "read-only" within a network's log of "Actions". For example, developers could allow a user to receive notice via email or text message that a specific action occurred, so the user could retract that "Action". The specific amount of time surrounding this specific time period, could be seconds or years. The specific delay period is determined by the application developer.

### Stolen Key Recovery
The Arisen software allows users to restore control of their Arisen account when their keys are stolen. An account owner can use the stolen "owner" key along with approval of a designated "account recovery partner". It is important to note that the account recovery partner cannot reset control of the account without the help of the user that possesses the "owner" key for the stolen account. Even if a hacker went through this process, it would be pointless, due to the fact that they already control the account, although, even if the hacker did go through with this process, the "account recovery partner" would probably demand some sort of multi-factor authentication (phone and email). That is, if the account recovery partner is a dApp itself. A recovery partner has no authority over day-to-day transactions, rather, the recovery partner is only a "party" to the recovery process. This will ultimately reduce legal liabilities, costs and lost currency that would be unrecoverable on blockchains that lack this feature.

## P2P Payments 
At the very foundation of the Arisen network is the ability of developers to create their own digital currencies, also known as "tokens". For this reason, Arisen is considered a multi-asset network. P2P currencies give way to P2P payments, which enables developers to add economic features within their decentralized applications. For example, a decentralized social network that's built on Arisen, could launch its own currency. This currency could be used to pay users for their posts, thereby giving them incentive to join the network.

### RSN Currency
ArisenCoin (RSN) is the native coin on the Arisen network. RSN is formerly known as ACO (AriseCoin), the first cryptocurrency other than Bitcoin, to ever be litigated over in the United States. RSN is being organically distributed to original contributors of the AriseCoin ICO, as well as millions of cryptocurrency holders around the world for free, to further decentralize the network. RSN is currently tokenized on the BitShares exchange and being actively traded.

## Off-Chain Components
Arisen is built to work alongside the dWeb protocol and its many "off-chain" protocols and components across its P2P network. Below, we will explain each of these in detail, how they create a dramatic increase in performance and form a completely decentralized toolset for developers.

### dDrive (Decentralized Content-Addressable Storage System)
Ethereum's developers along with the visionaries behind IPFS saw the need for decentralized content-addressable storage systems that operate on a peer-to-peer network. Arisen's "dDrive" is a decentralized content-addressable storage system or "dCass" for short, that is built on top of what is known as a "dDatabase" (read the white paper [here](https://github.com/distributedweb/ddatabase-whitepaper) ). A dDatabase is an append-only log that is used by dDrive to create an entire filesystem, where each file's metadata in the file system, along with the data associated with it, are encoded into two separate files (metadata.data and content.data). The filesystem metadata is mandatory and includes the filename, Stat Object, etc. The filesystem content.data file is completely optional and is only used to hold a historical file record, including every iteration of every file. dDrive's that utilize this feature are known as "Vaults", since they hold every single version of every single file that has ever existed within the dDrive itself. Each dDrive has a keypair, where only the holder of the private key can update the files held within it. The public key on the other hand, is used to access the dDrive over the dweb:// protocol, so that content within it can be easily addressed by peers over dWeb's P2P network.

For example, a website could be accessed via dWeb-enabled web browsers (like [dBrowser](https://github.com/dbrowser)), like this:
dweb://<ddrive-public-key>/index.html

dDrive is primarily used to contain the files associated with websites as well as web applications so that the need for servers becomes obsolete, since the files associated with websites and web applications are hosted between peers of a decentralized peer-to-peer network, rather than a centralized data center. dDrive as well as the dWeb protocol are directly being integrated with Arisen's Web4 SDKs, to allow for developers to build fully decentralized applications that work alongside Arisen's other off-chain components. dDrives store large datasets, like a web app's files, completely off-chain, while maintaining their decentralized state. This further boosts the network while making sure it never has to store large datasets like the ones related to websites and web apps.

#### Content Versioning
In addition to storing a historical record of filesystem metadata, the content of the files themselves are also capable of being stored in a version-controlled manner. All previous metadata for old versions of files is stored within the ".dweb" directory of every dDrive, so a dDrive knows how many updates have been made to it. When the "content.data" file is used, previous versions of websites and web applications can be accessed like so:

dweb://<ddrive-public-key>/index.html?v=1 (version 1)
dweb://<ddrive-public-key>/index.html?v=2 (version 2)

By using "dPack CLI" or "dDrive CLI", a dDrive's historical update log can be accessed.

### dAppDB (dDBMS)
A dAppDB database is a P2P key/value store that is also built on top of a dDatabase feed. dAppDB allows for data that derives from Arisen applications, to be stored off-chain, in an immutable and decentralized state. dAppDB-based databases are stored with the websites and/or web applications they're associated with. That means dAppDB-based databases are stored within dDrives, just like the websites and/or web applications they're related to. dAppDB comes with an onboard API that allows for developers to query, write, update, list and delete records. While records may be deleted, the previous record is still recorded in the database, while the "latest" record simply shows a "deleted" state. dAppDB and other future dDBMS' will only further boost Arisen's network performance, by placing all data that's not used by Arisen smart contracts, off-chain.

Read the [dAppDB Whitepaper](https://github.com/distributedweb/dappdb-whitepaper)

### dMemo (dAMP)
dMemo is a decentralized application messaging protocol that allows for:
- P2P messaging between users of an application
- application-to-application messaging 
- application instance to application instance messaging 

dMemo currently has a JavaScript-based reference implementation that includes a JavaScript-based API, as well as a CLI to interact with the dmemo:// protocol.

### The dweb:// Protocol
**NOTE:** ***We won't dive into all the technicalities of the dWeb as it has its own [whitepaper](https://github.com/distributedweb/whitepaper) where those technicalities are explained in-depth. On the other hand, we will explain how the dWeb protocol further empowers Arisen-powered websites and web applications.***

The dWeb protocol is responsible for syncing dDrive between peers on a dWeb P2P network. In other words, dWeb's protocol is responsible for syncing Arisen-powered websites and web applications between peers on a dWeb P2P network. dWeb's protocol allows for websites and web applications to remain outside of the HTTP protocol, as well as the centralized web. dDrives, dAppDB-based databases and other dWeb tools can all be accessed via the ```dweb://``` protocol, just as centralized websites and web applications can be accessed over the ```http://``` protocol. dWeb addresses are simply Ed25519 public keys (32 bytes and 64 characters when HEX encoded).

dWeb links take on the following formats:

dWeb Key:
```8e1b9399n7d3jd18d2ddk382928109394817239a9```

Using the dWeb protocol prefix:
```dweb://8e1b9399n7d3jd18d...```

Via a TXT dDNS record, where a dWeb key is accessed over a dTLD:
```dweb://dtest.dcom``` or ```https:test.dcom```

Over the HTTP protocol:
```https://dpacks.io/8e1b9399n7d3j....```

All messages that are transported over the dWeb protocol are end-to-end encrypted and digitally signed using the dDrive's public key (the dWeb address), during the transport process. If you are unaware of the public key for a dDrive, then you will not be able to "revelate" or communicate with any publisher or seeder within that dDrive's "flock of peers". On the other hand, anyone who has the dDrive's public key, can verify that data within a dDrive derived from the publisher (the owner of the private key). This is because every dDrive or dWeb-based repository (dPack) has a private key that directly corresponds with it. A dDrive or dPack's private key is kept in the original dDrive or dPack folder, on the publisher's device that originally created the dDrive or dPack itself. dWeb's protocol will never expose the public or private key of a dDrive or dPack over a public network of any kind. This is made possible through the ```revelation protocol``` where a BLAKE2b hash is taken of the dWeb address (public key) and is ultimately used as the ```revelation key```. In other words, the original key is impossible to find unless of course you have shared this key publicly or have attached it to a dTLD. Most websites, web applications and their dWeb keys will be exposed publicly, just as they are over HTTP. Although, there are dDrives and dPacks that will remain private and should always remain private. 

dDrives that hold a dAppDB-based database with a stream of messages between two users of a messenger dApp, may want to keep messages between themselves inside a private room, where it is broadcasted over a dWeb address that purposely remains private (if the dApp had private rooms, where dWeb addresses remained private and has no exposure of any kind). This is so the conversation between these two users always remains private between them (unless of course they expose the dWeb address to the public at a later time). As you can see, there are many use-cases for dWeb addresses and it's ultimately up to the developers and the consumers on whether they want to publicize them or not. Privacy will always remain one of the most important design elements of the protocol itself.

#### End-To-End Encrypted Traffic
Web 2.0 and 3.0 provided us with the ability to encrypt traffic from a consumer's computer to a particular server or group of servers that they were exchanging data with, by utilizing what is known as the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL). This guaranteed that all data exchanged between a consumer's device and server(s) the consumer was connecting with, remained private, as long as a hacker hadn't infiltrated the server(s) and had access to the consumer's logs. Even if a hacker simply intercepted traffic between a consumer's device and the server(s), the hacker would be unable to read the HTTP traffic exchanged between the two, if SSL was being used. This requires the client to trust the server it is attempting to connect to which is pretty problematic. With the recent hacks of Capital One's servers, where a former AWS employee had published the personal information of many Capital One customers, servers are no longer a trustable source to connect with for clients, if the providers and employees of those providers can no longer be trusted. While the dWeb eliminates the need for servers, web hosting companies or web infrastructure services like Amazon's AWS, it is not "perfectly secure". It's actually in the hands of developers and publishers to keep their dWeb addresses (public keys) a secret, if data within a dDrive or a dPack is to remain private.

There is an obvious tradeoff in P2P networks, like a dWeb-based network between peer revelation and consumer privacy. The more dWeb peers you lookup and exchange data with, the more peers you have to trust with the data being exchanged. Remember a dDrive or dPack can remain private and will never be found by attackers, even if it's privately shared with a group of peers, over a dWeb-based network, because a revelation key (a BLAKE2B hash of a dWeb address) is used instead of the dWeb address (public key). Although, if that key were to be shared publicly, attackers could access the data within it at will. Therefore, the protocol is designed for developers to design their own privacy guidelines and make their own privacy decisions as it pertains to their own dSites (decentralized websites) and dApps (decentralized applications). This also means developers can choose which network revelation providers to integrate with (e.g. BitTorrent). Although a developer should only integrate with revelation networks they trust, like the old client/server model mentioned above. With dWeb's protocol, privacy is now in the hands of the consumer, instead of the provider and traffic is always encrypted from one end to the other.

### dPacks (Distributed Repositories)
dDrives that contain websites and web applications are typically referred to as "distributed repositories" or dPacks for short.  They act just like centralized software repositories, where entire codebases related to websites and applications can be fully managed, on a per-version basis or where a website or web application can be forked, customized and then distributed by a new author, to other peers on the network. For example, lets say that you wanted to use the website behind [dWebs.io](https://dwebs.io), you could fork it via the dPack CLI or dBrowser and could launch your own rendition of it to promote to your friends or customers. Every single website or web application on the dWeb is automatically open sourced to the general public. Once it's publicized, anyone with access to it can fork it and make it their own. As an added bonus, dBrowser has its own built-in web repository that is equipped with a graphical user interface (GUI).

### dBrowser (Decentralized Web Browser)
dBrowser enables Arisen-powered websites and web applications that are distributed between peers, to be accessed over the ```dweb://``` protocol. dBrowser also enables users to browse websites and web applications over the ```http://``` protocol. dBrowser will soon bring to life browser extensions, similar to the browser extensions used by web browsers like Chrome and Firefox. dBrowser also includes a GUI for any dPack (dWeb-based distributed repository), where files can be managed, as well as all public metadata associated with it (title and description). Developers can also utilize dBrowser as a way of debugging P2P traffic, using the ```Flock Debugger``` application, that is built-in to dBrowser's desktop application.

**NOTE:** ***dBrowser will soon have its own whitepaper, although, we felt it was important to at least include it as apart of the toolset for Arisen, as it allows consumers to easily access completely decentralized websites and applications, just as they do centralized websites and applications. dBrowser adds many features to the overall user-experience of Arisen-powered websites and applications and is a software release by the Arisen core development team.***

## Deterministic Parallel Execution of Applications
**NOTE:** ***Several portions of this section were taken from the EOS.IO whitepaper.***
Arisen's DPOS-based consensus algorithm is dependent upon deterministic (reproducible) behavior, which means all parallel execution must remain without mutexes or locking primitives. When transactions are executed in parallel, it's important that these transactions don't create non-deterministic results, considering the absence of locks. 

***The current release of Arisen will run single-threaded, considering it's loosely based on the June 2018 release of the EOS.IO software, although the necessary data structures needed for future multithreaded parallel execution are in place.***

When Arisen's blockchain begins producing in parallel, block producers will organize "Action" delivery into individual "shards" in order to evaluate transactions in parallel. The scheduling of transactions will be deterministically executed according to the output of a block producer, although the protocol for the generation of transaction scheduling will not be deterministic. Because of this, block producers can take advantage of parallel algorithms to schedule transactions.

With parallel execution, it's important to note, that when a new "Action" is generated by a "script" or "contract", it does not get delivered instantly, rather it's scheduled to be delivered in the next cycle, because the receiver may be actively modifying its own state within a completely different shard. 

### Minimizing Communication Latency
Latency is the time it takes for one account to send an "Action" to another account and then receive a response. The goal is to enable two accounts to exchange "Actions" back and forth within a single block without having to wait 0.5 second between each "Action". To enable this, the EOS.IO software divides each block into cycles. Each cycle is divided into shards and each shard contains a list of transactions. Each transaction contains a set of "Actions" to be delivered. This structure can be visualized as a tree where alternating layers are processed sequentially and in parallel. 

```
Block
    Region
         Cycles (sequential)
              Shards (parallel)
                   Transactions (sequential)
                          Actions (sequential)
                               Receiver and Notified Accounts (parallel)                                               
```

Transactions generated in one cycle can be delivered in any subsequent cycle or block. Block producers will keep adding cycles to a block until the maximum wall clock time has passed or there are no new generated transactions to deliver.

It is possible to use static analysis of a block to verify that within a given cycle no two shards contain transactions that modify the same account. So long as that invariant is maintained a block can be processed by running all shards in parallel.

### Read-Only Action Handlers
Some accounts may be able to process an "Action" on a pass/fail basis without modifying their internal state. If this is the case, then these handlers can be executed in parallel so long as only read-only "Action" handlers for a particular Arisen account are included in one or more shards within a particular cycle. 

### Atomic Transactions with Multiple Accounts
Sometimes it's desirable to ensure that "Actions" are delivered to and accepted by multiple accounts atomically. In this case, both "Actions" are placed in one transaction and both accounts will be assigned the same shard and the "Actions" applied sequentially.

### Partial Evaluation Of Blockchain State
Scaling blockchain technology necessitates that components are modular. Everyone should not have to run everything, especially if they only need to use a small subset of the applications. An exchange application developer runs full nodes for the purpose of displaying the exchange state to its users. This exchange application has no need for the state associated with social media applications. Arisen's software allows any full node to pick any subset of applications to run. Actions delivered to other applications are safely ignored if your application never depends upon the state of another contract.

### Subjective Best Effort Scheduling
The Arisen software cannot obligate block producers to deliver any "Action" to any other Arisen account. Each block producer makes their own subjective measurement of the computational complexity and time required to process a transaction. This applies whether a transaction is generated by a user or automatically by a smart contract.

On a launched blockchain adopting the EOS.IO software, at a network level all transactions are billed a computational bandwidth cost based on the number of WASM instructions executed. However, each individual block producer using the software may calculate resource usage using their own algorithm and measurements. When a block producer concludes that a transaction or account has consumed a disproportionate amount of computational capacity they simply reject the transaction when producing their own block; however, they will still process the transaction if other block producers consider it valid. 

In general, so long as even 1 block producer considers a transaction as valid and under the resource usage limits then all other block producers will also accept it, but it may take up to 1 minute for the transaction to find that producer. In some cases, a producer may create a block that includes transactions that are an order of magnitude outside of acceptable ranges. In this case, the next block producer may opt to reject the block and the tie will be broken by the third producer. This is no different than what would happen if a large block caused network propagation delays. The community would notice a pattern of abuse and eventually remove votes from the rogue producer. 

This subjective evaluation of computational cost frees the blockchain from having to precisely and deterministically measure how long something takes to run. With this design there is no need to precisely count instructions which dramatically increases opportunities for optimization without breaking consensus. 

### Deferred Transactions 
Arisen's software supports deferred transactions that are scheduled to execute in the future. This enables computation to move to different shards and/or the creation of long-running processed that continuously schedule a continuance transaction.

### Context Free Actions
A Context Free Action involves computations that depend only on transaction data, but not upon the blockchain state. Signature verification, for example, is a computation that requires only the transaction data and a signature to determine the public key that signed the transaction. This is one of the most expensive individual computations a blockchain must perform, but because this computation is context free it can be performed in parallel. 

Context Free Actions are like other user "Actions", except they lack access to the blockchain state to perform validation. Not only doe this enable Arisen to process all Context Free Actions, such as signature verification in parallel, but more importantly, this enables generalized signature verification.

With support for Context Free Actions, scalability techniques such as Sharding, Raiden, Plasma, State Channels and others become much more parallelizable and practical. This development enables efficient inter-blockchain communication, as well as unlimited scalability for on-chain activity.

## The Decentralized Data Center
Arisen's software brings to life what can be viewed as a decentralized data center of sorts, where application developers and network participants alike have the ability to purchase resources on the network.

These resources include:
1. Bandwidth and Log Storage (Disk)
2. Computational and Computational Backlog (CPU); and 
3. State Storage (RAM)

The Arisen blockchain's state storage is information that is accessible from application logic (smart contracts). Information from state storage would include information such as order books and a user's account balance. State that derives outside of a smart contract is typically stored within a dDBMS like dAppDB. For example, the content of a social media post would be stored in a dDBMS, while the number of "likes" a post had would be stored within state storage.

### Resource Marketplace
Bandwidth and Computation have two separate usage models, instantaneous usage and long-term usage. The Arisen blockchain maintains a log of all the Actions and this log is ultimately stored and downloaded by all full nodes. The state of all websites and applications on the network can be reconstructed through this log of "Actions". Although, regenerating state from an Action log, creates computation debt on the network and management of Arisen's computational debt is paramount when it comes to the network's overall performance. Therefore a decentralized data center that manages Arisen's state storage capacity was created, where a user who stakes RSN can consume a proportionate amount of the network's resources. Arisen block producers publish their available resources to the network for participants of the network to consume, proportional to the amount of RSN held in a 3-day staking contract. As an example, if an account stakes 5% of all RSN in circulation, it will be able to use 5% of Arisen's state storage capacity. That is, if the account actually owns 5% of all RSN in circulation. Bandwidth and computational capacity are allocated on a fractional reserve basis, because state storage capacity cannot be saved for future consumption. Resource usage constraints is considered to be subjective, whereas the enforcement of these constraints is handled by block producers via their own individual algorithms and estimates. Although, the number of Actions delivered and the size of the data stored in the internal database are cheap to measure objectively. Arisen's software enables block producers to apply the same algorithm over these objective measurements but may choose to apply stricter subjective algorithms over subjective measurements. 

The question is, who should pay for these resources, the user or the developers? When it comes to the centralized web, centralized application developers are required to cover the costs that it takes to run their applications (domains, server costs, etc.) and the decentralized web should be no different when it pertains to the execution of smart contracts that handle the application logic for decentralized applications. The true difference is the fact that developers no longer have to pay for constantly increasing infrastructure costs as it pertains to hosting their application, its files or databases, since this is hosted on a P2P network utilizing Arisen's off-chain components and protocols. Now, developers pay nominal fees for the creation of user accounts, the execution of smart contracts and costs related to state storage. This ultimately empowers application developers to significantly reduce complexity, rid themselves of rationing systems and can ultimately delegate bandwidth and computation to their users so that the "sender pays" model enforces the usage. This also allows developers to determine their own monetization strategy for their products/services. It is also possible for accounts to temporarily or permanently rent unconsumed bandwidth to other accounts, whereas Arisen's software will recognize this delegation of capacity and allocate bandwidth accordingly. Although, while bandwidth and computation can ultimately be delegated, storage of application state will require an application developer to hold RSN until that state is deleted. If state is never deleted, then the RSN are effectively removed from circulation. The amount of bandwidth available to an application is entirely independent of any token price as well.

## Arisen Governance
The Arisen blockchain is ultimately designed to be a decentralized democracy, where the people are able to reach consensus concerning issues that involve the community at-large, the Arisen software, as well as the safety and welfare of the community itself. From a computer science perspective, the users of the Arisen P2P network are governed through a "governance" process, concerning subjective matters that require collaborative action, the power to proceed forth with the decisions that are agreed upon by the governance themselves and the vested power to create amendments to a network-wide Constitution that was ratified in order to protect the rights of the network's users.

Elected block producers that are instituted through the DPOS algorithm are also known and considered as elected Governance members. Essentially Governance members must approve all changes to the Arisen software that have been requested by the community themselves. This model works, because if Governance members go against the wishes of RSN holders, users of the network will most likely remove their votes from those specific Governance members who ultimately went against their wishes. As a safety valve, non-producing full-node validators (dApps, decentralized banks, decentralized exchanges, etc.) have the power to reject changes that are made without the permission of RSN holders. 

### Freezing Accounts
The freezing of accounts on the EOS network was a heated debate amongst many blockchain enthusiasts. In truth, every single blockchain is designed to allow block producers to pick and choose if specific transactions are included within a specific block. Therefore, block producers of all blockchains have the ability to freeze accounts. EOS.IO's software formalized this authority by making sure the process of freezing an account had to be approved by a 15/21 vote amongst active Governance members. Arisen's blockchain expands upon EOS' vision, to enable people of the network to police for many illegal activities, that of which are included within the [Arisen Constitution](https://github.com/arisenio/constitution) itself. Due to Arisen's expanded decentralized toolset and the involvement of the dWeb protocol, it because important that the Arisen Governance and people of the community were able to block certain content that was being stored both on-chain and off-chain.

The importance of bringing our decentralized communities out of the "wild west" is paramount when it comes to placing the decentralized web into the hands of billions of internet users around the world. Currently, a dark cloud hangs over our ability to innovate and bring human rights back to billions, where many governments are using the bad deeds of a few, to crucify our vision for a better web. In truth, the people should have the right to police their own community, as well as the ability to decide on which activities are suitable and which activities are not. Allowing people to do whatever they want on a decentralized network, gives governments the ability to do whatever it takes to destroy what We The People have set out to do. 

To solve this, Arisen and dApps on the network, can give the users of the network and these dApps the ability to report illicit activities to the Governance. Some of these illicit activities can be reported through an "Emergency Proposal", where content like illegal pornography can be blacklisted or the theft of RSN can be halted, by a 15/21 vote from active Governance members. The importance of freezing Arisen accounts does not negate the decentralized nature of the network. As a matter of fact, if Governance members abuse their power to freeze accounts, communities members can remove their votes from those malicious Governance member and accounts will ultimately be unfrozen. Decentralization places the power with the people and Arisen will never move way from that ideology. It's hard-coded into its existence. 

### Updating Application Code
Applications on the network that act maliciously can shutdown an entire blockchain. Arisen allows its Governance to replace malicious code within smart contracts, through a 15/21 vote of elected Governance members. This enables the blockchain to proceed forth without a hard fork, that would otherwise be needed to remove the code of a malicious application. 

### Arisen Constitution 
The rights of users on the Arisen network, as stated above, is based around the [Arisen Constitution](https://github.com/arisenio/constitution). The EOS network elected to change their Constitution to a user agreement, while the Arisen network will allow dApps to issue user agreements, that are based around the rights of users and governance members that has ultimately been ratified within the network's Constitution. The Constitution can be amended through AIPs that are issued by community members or through requests made by Governance members that are thereby voted on by community members. Amendments to the Arisen Constitution can only be made through a 15/21 vote of active governance members.

### Process For Constitutional Amendments & Software Upgrades 
The Arisen network was built around the old saying "The Code Is The Law". For this reason, the protocol itself, as defined in the canonical source code and the Arisen Constitution can only be updated through the following process:
1. A change to the Arisen Constitution is proposed by Governance members and approved by a 15/21 vote.
2. The Governance is able to maintain this approval count, for 30 consecutive days.
3. All accounts on the Arisen network, when processing a transaction, would have to accept this new Constitution as a condition for future transactions. 
4. Governance members must adopt changes to the [ArisenIO](https://github.com/arisenio/arisen) source code to reflect the change in the Arisen Constitution and must propose it to the blockchain using a hash of the Arisen Constitution.
5. Governance members maintain 15/21 approval of the new code for 30 consecutive days.
6. Once the approval for the new code has maintained approval for 30 days, the code will take effect exactly 7 days layer, giving all non-producing full nodes, exactly one week to upgrade after the new changes to Arisen's source code. 
7. All Arisen nodes on the network who do not upgrade to the new Arisen release, will shutdown automatically. 

This process or software upgrades (updating the blockchain) will take anywhere from 2 to 3 months, while updates to fix non-critical bugs that do not require changes to the constitution can take 1 to 2 months. 

### Emergency Changes
Governance members may accelerate the process of software upgrades, if it involves a harmful bug or security exploit that is actively harming users. Although, this does go against the Constitution. Generally, it is up to the elected Governance to make these emergency decisions. 

### Governance Rewards (Block Rewards)
Governance members, aka block producers are awarded with new RSN coins every time a block is produced on the Arisen network. The number of RSN coins that are created is determined by the median of the desired pay published by all Governance members. The Arisen software may be configured to enforce a cap on Governance rewards, to where the total annual increase in RSN's coin supply, does not exceed 5%.

### Arisen Improvement Proposals (AIPs)
While RSN holders can elect Governance members, they can also vote on what are known as Arisen Improvement Proposals (AIPs) and thereby elect a number of AIPs in order to advance the ideals of the community. Winning AIPs will receive a certain amount of RSN coins, up to the configured percent of RSN's inflation rate, not including the amount of RSN that's programmatically awarded to Governance members. Although, AIPs will only receive RSN, proportional to the amount of votes each AIP has received from RSN holders. 

**NOTE:** ***The ability to submit AIPs currently hasn't been implemented but will be implemented through a smart contract at a later date, so a hard fork won't be needed.***

## Smart Contracts & Virtual Machines
 From a computer science perspective, Arisen's software is responsible for coordinating the delivery of authenticated messages (called Actions) to Arisen accounts. Truly, any programming language or virtual machine can be implemented to work with Arisen's software, as these implementation specific details are for the most part, independent from Arisen's core design philosophy. Although, languages and virtual machines must be deterministic and properly sandboxed with sufficient performance, if they are to be integrated with Arisen's APIs. 

### Arisen Smart Contracts
By default, Arisen utilizes C++ as its core smart contract programming language. C++ is one of the oldest and most proven programming languages in the world and allows Arisen's smart contract platform to operate on C++'s powerful foundation, while keeping developers from having to learn new languages like Ethereum's Solidity and Vyper. Any developer who is familiar with Arisen's APIs, will be able to write Arisen smart contracts using canonical C++ code constructs. 

### The Arisen Virtual Machine
Above the Arisen core protocol layer, sits a Web Assembly (WASM) virtual machine, that is responsible for executing the code within smart contracts. Google, Microsoft, Apple and others use the WASM standard within their own internet infrastructure software and have battle-tested this standard over the years. By choosing WASM, Arisen's software is able to re-use optimized compilers and toolchains, that of which are being maintained and improved by a much larger development community. The design decision to use WASM also allows for compiler developers to port other programming languages onto Arisen.

### Schema Defined Actions
All "Actions" sent between Arisen accounts are defined by a schema which is part of the blockchain consensus state. This schema allows seamless conversation between binary and JSON representation of the Actions, held within a smart contract.

### Schema Defined On-Chain Database
Database state is also defined using a similar schema. This ensures that all data stored by all websites and web applications is in a format that can be interpreted as human readable JSON but stored and manipulated with the efficiency of binary. 

### Separating Authentication from Application
Like EOS.IO's software, Arisen segregates "validation logic" into three separate segments, to maximize parallelization opportunities and minimize the computational debt associated with regenerating application state from the transaction log. 

- Validating that an "Action" is internally consistent;
- Validating that all preconditions are valid; and
- Modifying the application state. 

Validating the internal consistency of a "Action" is read-only and requires no access to blockchain state. This means that it can be performed with maximum parallelism. Validating preconditions within a smart contract, such as a required balance, is read-only will certainly benefit from parallelism. Write access is only required when the modification of an application's state is taking place and therefore would be processed in sequentially for each application in question.

Authentication is simply a read-only process, executed from within a smart contract, in order to verify that a specific "Action" can ultimately be applied. Under this model, the website(s) and/or web application(s) are doing the work. In real time, the calculation of computational debt and the regeneration of application state from the transaction log are both required to be performed, although, once a transaction has been included in the blockchain, it is no longer necessary to perform the authentication operation(s).

## Blockchain Interoperability
Arisen's software, like EOS.IO was designed coordinate and facilitate blockchain interoperability, through the generation of both "Action" existence and "Action" sequence. The combination of both "Action" existence and "Action" sequence teamed with an application architecture designed around "Action" passing, enables high-level abstractions that are ultimately presented to developers by concealing all blockchain communications and proof validations.

### LCV
EOS.IO first presented the concept of Merkle Proofs for Light Client Validation (LCV) with the idea that all clients didn't need to process all transactions, in order to make the integration with other blockchains much easier. For example, a decentralized banking application that operates on an Arisen-based blockchain would only be concerned with the transactions that are taking place from within the application itself. This is supported by the idea that a blockchain's block producers would want the smallest possible overhead when syncing with another blockchain.

The Arisen software uses LCV to prove the existence of any transaction with a proof of less than 1024 bytes in size (a valid proof on the Bitcoin network is about 512 bytes). By sing LCV, Arisen can prove that a block is included in another blockchain by simply utilizing a specific blockID of a block, as well as the corresponding headers of a block, as long as the block is trusted and irreversible. This sort of proof takes ceil(log2(N)) digests for its path, where N is the number of blocks in the blockchain. By using SHA256 as its digest method, you prove the existence of any block in a blockchain which contains 100 million blocks, in 864 bytes. Therefore, tracking all block headers is cheap at 420MB/year and will ultimately keep proof sizes small. Although, over time it makes more sense to simply have one blockchain that contains the entire histories of other blockchains, to completely eliminate the need for proofs. By minimizing the frequency of inter-chain proofs, we can further boost the network's performance. 

### Latency 
Thanks to Arisen's DPOS consensus algorithm, along with the inclusion of aBFT, Arisen-based blockchains are able to provide rapid irreversibility. This means, there is only 0.5 second latency between Arisen and EOS-based blockchains that use this same consensus model. This is because when one blockchain communicates with another, block producers have to wait until a transaction's irreversibility has been confirmed by the other blockchain. When it comes to Arisen-to-Arisen communications, the latency is minimal. When it comes to Arisen-based blockchains, communicating with outside blockchains, the latency could take 10 minutes or more in some cases.

### POC (Proof of Completeness)
Arisen uses POC (proof of completeness) to prove there are no gaps in transaction history, when verifying transactions from an outside blockchain, rather than attempting to prove that all transactions on the other blockchain are valid. This is because it is impossible to prove that all of the most recent transactions are known. By identifying each "Action" sent to an account by sequencing these Actions, an Arisen user is able to prove that each Action intended for a particular Arisen account, has ultimately been processed in order.         

### SegWit 
Arisen utilizes the concept of "SegWit" also known as Segregated Witness, to eliminate the need for storing the sha256 hashes used by proofs to derive blockchain state. Rather, once a Merkle proof is accepted and deemed irreversible, the 2KB of hashes used for derivation are no longer stored. As it applies to blockchain interoperability, savings are 32x greater than using typical signatures. 

### BENCH Protocol
Arisen will be interoperable with all EOS.IO-based blockchains that keep the same standard design required for true EOS-to-EOS interoperability. In the very near future, interoperability will be achieved with BitShares, as well as Ethereum through what will be known as the BENCH protocol. The BENCH protocol is currently under development and will be explained in-depth inside of a the "Bench Whitepaper" (TBA). BENCH stands for "Bridging Every Network Connection Holistically". As a side note, the BEOS project has already achieved interoperability with BitShares while using the EOS.IO software. Currently RSN is tokenized on the BitShares blockchain (soon the Ethereum and EOS blockchains) and will be able to transfer from chain-to-chain seamlessly. 

### Arisen SideChains
Arisen community members are launching several SideChains like aFood, aHealth, aCommunity, aCommerce, aTelecom, aBank, aEnergy, aEducation and more for future dApp releases that are currently under development. Anyone can launch an Arisen SideChain, by simply launching their own Arisen network. Since Arisen-based networks use their own ```chainID```, there is no way to confuse to two chains, although, they can both share resources, transactions and digital assets between each other. For more information on the above mentioned SideChains, please follow these projects via Arisen's official Telegram room - [@arisenio](https://t.me/arisenio)

## 8.JS
The ```8.JS``` library will bring Arisen's on-chain and off-chain APIs together, into one single library enabling developers to build websites and web applications that are decentralized from domain to payments (end-to-end). Not to be confused with Ethereum's ```Web3.js```, ```8.JS``` will be the only SDK for building fully decentralized websites and web applications, allowing developers to:
- register dTLDs.
- reserve dTLDs extensions.
- edit dTLD dDNS records.
- create/manage/retrieve dDrives.
- create/manage/retrieve dDatabase feeds.
- create/manage/retrieve dAppDB-based databases.
- create/manage/interact with dWeb repositories (dPacks) along with dWeb addresses.
- interact with Arisen's on-chain APIs (payments/smart contracts).
- interact with dWeb-based peers.

```8.JS``` is currently under development and will not be included in the October 2019 launch of Arisen's public network, although it should launch not to long after that.
 
## dDNS (Decentralized Domain Name System)
On the traditional internet, the Domain Name System (DNS), allows us to use human-readable names in the browser, while resolving those names to IP addresses or other identifiers. Arisen powers a decentralized domain name system, that allows for the use of human-readable names, also known as dTLDs (Decentralized top-level domains) that point to dWeb addresses or other identifiers. Human-readable names (HRNs), as you read earlier in this whitepaper, are used when creating accounts. dDNS is essentially a dApp on the network, considering it's powered through a smart contract and a dTLD is  nothing but an account on the Arisen blockchain. 

dTLD extensions like .dcom or .dnet or can be created and then auctioned off to the highest bidder. Whereas, dTLDs can be registered like usernames, where RAM has to be staked in order to store the dTLD on-chain. dDNS, along with dTLDs are apart of the first approved AIP (AIP-01) and will be released in the near future. The first known dApp to bring dDNS to life on the Arisen network is known as "dNames".

## Turing Completeness
The term "Turing Completeness" refers to the father of computer science - Alan Turing. When working with the Arisen blockchain, you will be lucky if you don't run across the term "Turning Completeness" or "Turing Complete". In 1936, Turing created a mathematical model of a state machine t hat manipulated symbols by reading and writing them on sequential memory (meant to resemble an infinite-length paper-tape). With this construct, Turing would then release a mathematical foundation t o answer questions about universal computability. Meaning, whether all problems are solvable. Turing ultimately proved that there are classes of problems that are incomputable. 

In this model, Turing specifically proved the "halting problem" (whether it was possible given an arbitrary program and its inputs, to determine whether the program will eventually stop running) is not solvable. Alan Turing further defined a system to be Turing Complete if it can be used to simulate any Turing Machine. Such a system is called a Universal Turing Machine. Arisen's ability to execute a stored program (smart contract) in a state machine (The Arisen World Computer), while reading and writing data to memory, makes it a Turing-Complete system and therefore a UTM. Arisen can compute algorithms that can be computed by any Turing machine, given the limitations of finite memory.

Turing proved that you cannot predict whether a program will terminate by simulating it on a computer. In other words, we cannot predict what the outcome of a program will be, without running it. Turing-complete systems  can run in infinite loops or in simpler terms - without a termination point. They say it's trivial to create a program that runs in a loop that never ends, but intended, never-ending loops can arise without warning, due to complex interactions between the starting conditions and the code. Arisen cannot predict if a smart contract will terminate or how long it will run, without actually running it. This means that smart contracts can be designed to purposely run forever, after a node attempts to validate them, so that they consume all of Arisen's available network resources. To attack this issue, Ethereum introduced the "gas" metering mechanism, whereas the Arisen network uses the NET, CPU and RAM metering mechanisms, as mentioned earlier in this whitepaper. The Arisen World Computer (AWC), can account for every instruction (computation, data access). In order to execute  contract-based transactions on the network, a user is required to have NET, CPU and RAM resources, so that these resources cannot be abused through a DOS or other malicious act. NET, CPU and RAM can only be purchased with RSN (the native currency on the Arisen network). NET, CPU and RAM are the metering mechanisms Arisen uses to allow Turing-complete computation, while limiting the resources that any program can consume on the AWC.

## Conclusion
Arisen is a powerful combination of different technologies innovated by the likes of Daniel Larimer, Maxwell Ogden, Joe Hand and Jared Rice Sr., that ultimately bring together the only toolset for creating truly decentralized websites and web applications. Today, this powerful combination of decentralized internet infrastructure softwares will ultimately birth the decentralized web, an internet that actually works for the people, rather than major corporations and tyrannical governments. One that isn't ran by a few, rather, it's ran by us all. Arisen itself was built through pain and created with a real purpose, that was truly realized through actual torture. Arisen's network will always be known for more than just it's software, in truth, it will be known for its history and its story. A story that will show, that the People's Internet was born out of true necessity. It is our hope, that this purpose will give developers around the world a new purpose -- to decentralize the world and everything in it. 

## Our Story
The Arisen blockchain is a project with a story like no other decentralized network or blockchain in existence. While it's important that we keep this whitepaper focused on the technological aspects of the blockchain, you must come to understand why this vision was created, where these ideas came to fruition and how Arisen would eventually arise from the ashes, for one to realize the power and collective passion behind what was once a movement, long before it was ever a network. 

This project was originally, and for some, infamously bootstrapped by the efforts of Jared Rice Sr. and Stanley Ford. It was then promoted to millions of people around the world as "AriseBank", after Rice was purposely raided at gunpoint by the SEC and FBI, one day before the well-documented launch of the blockchain, where the software and contributions from the community were ultimately seized. Just days after the seizure of software and web applications that Rice had developed for ten months, he proclaimed to the national media that "the government can take anything of mine that's tangible, my software and even my reputation -- but they'll never take my vision". This created a growing movement around Rice, that became known as the "Arise Army". He would publicly vow that as long as he remained a free man, that he'd find a way to rebuild all the software that was seized, distribute "AriseCoin" to all those who originally contributed and would make sure his work could never be seized or removed from the web again. 

The promise led to the creation of the dWeb protocol (dweb://), dDrive, dMemo, dBrowser, dDatabase, dAppDB and a suite of developer tools that made up what Rice called "The Distributed Web". The project's code utilized many BitTorrent libraries, where the distributed web was simply a network of torrents made up of web applications and websites, instead of movies and music. Rice soon thereafter launched dBrowser BETA to the community, as a web browser for dWeb-based applications and websites, where he would launch the world's first completely decentralized social network for public testing, along with a decentralized CMS (content-management system) known as dPress. 

Weeks later, Rice unveiled the "Arisen" blockchain, with an initial testnet launch. Many original AriseBank contributors created wallets anticipating the launch of the "aBank" dApp, a rebuild of the aBank dApp that was originally seized by the federal government earlier that year. Days later, Rice released a launch schedule to the AriseBank community, where dWeb would be launched publicly the following day, in a chat room that was being monitored by the federal government. The following morning, Rice was arrested by FBI agents, over 10 months after the initial raid and wasn't allowed bond. Prosecutors at a bond hearing, under oath, said that Rice was a danger to the public because he was trying to "scam contributors again", knowing all along that Rice had announced he was giving all of Arisen's coins away for free. Prosecutors also noted a donate button on his personal website, where those who appreciated his development efforts, could donate to his legal fund, his family, as well as ongoing development efforts, as a reason to deny his bond. With no evidence to back their claims, Rice was still held without a bond. 

Weeks before the raid and nearly eleven months before the indictment and immediate arrest of Rice, a Governance was established around his efforts that was made up of 21 witnesses, made up of many major BitShares community members. This governance would ultimately be entrusted with carrying on Rice's work in the event he was incarcerated or incapable of carrying on with the projects. The dWeb and Arisen's blockchain were immediately placed under the protection of the Governance and safeguarded until plans could be made around their continued development and launch. From behind bars, Rice continued preaching the importance of decentralization to the community, as well as the Governance from a segregated jail cell that he would find himself in for months, after threats were made on his life. As the debate on how to push forward continued, Rice was busy writing code on notebook paper and continuing on with his work, even without access to a computer. At one point, he had over 20 notepads full of code, ideas, as well as launch instructions for members of the Governance, so the dWeb and Arisen could ultimately be launched.

Due to the 120 year sentence Rice was already facing and the threat from prosecutors that they would tack on 100 extra years worth of charges if he didn't plead guilty, Rice elected to take a five year plea agreement. Rice was immediately moved to a federal facility where he had email-only computer access and away from the inhumane county jail he was held in for 4 months following his arrest. Members of the community assisted Rice in sending printed versions of various dWeb codebases, screenshots of where he had left off on certain projects, updated books on various new versions of an array of programming languages and even newly released programming standards, so that Rice could update dWeb and Arisen's  codebases. This would ultimately allow him to ramp up development efforts, with nothing but a pen and paper. 

From there the project was back on track and several anonymous community members stepped up to fund domain renewals and ongoing server fees. A large and ever-expanding community have officially adopted Rice's work to ultimately safeguard it, until its launch, where Arisen will officially arise from the ashes. It is important to note, that it was Rice's wish that all original AriseBank contributors were given 4x the amount of coins they would have received via the ICO (contributors, nearly two years later have yet to receive their money back from the federal government) and that the rest of the coins, evenly spread to people around the world for free. That wish is coming to fruition, as last week over 200 original contributors have received RSN on the BitShares exchange.

In the end, all that Rice cared about was that his vision came to life and that his work could impact millions of lives, if not more, around the world. Anyone who witnessed his work, perseverance and many sacrifices for the crypto community at-large understand why he never gave up in pushing forward with his vision. His work and sacrifices are now being realized by many and as a decentralized community, we press forward knowing that the founding fathers of Arisen believed that our human rights mattered and even sacrificed their own, to make all of this possible for us. Therefore, Arisen is forever a symbol of sacrifice, perseverance and freedom, where true decentralization became paramount in bringing our founder's vision to life. That level of need for true decentralization will eventually protect millions of users and ideas from around the globe, allowing the process of truly decentralizing the world, a chance to finally commence, without any possible central points of failure. Arise was never about what they said it was. It was always about We The People. Looking back at all the things Jared said, makes that more obvious today than it ever has been. I'm honored that I was along for the journey.

- @east-wick 
Arisen Governance Member

"The darkness engulfs me and there is little room to spread my wings. I'm confined, breathing a foul, putrid air. Where am I and what is that loud, powerful bass drum striking in perfect rhythm, like an immense heart resonating against my soul? My mind is racing and an overwhelming sense of terror haunts me as the brain searches for the lost fragments of memory. Visualizations of a beast stretching the globe and me with my sword battling against impossible odds. My body, integrity, character, the very fiber of my existence was swallowed and now presumed dead in its jaws, as my unwavering comrades in arms observed in horror. I'm alive, transformed, wiser, my own heart beating with purpose. I'm not dead. I have Arisen."
- The Phoenix
